1 
  
Recommendations  on Urban 
Logistics  
Expert Group on U rban Mobility, subgroup  4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable urban logistics 
planning  (SULP)  
 
 
Adopted by the EGUM Plenary on  05.12.2024  
 
 
 
 
This document has been prepared by the Expert Group for Urban Mobility set up by Commission Decision C(2022) 5320 of 28.7.202 2, register 
of Commission Expert Groups and Other Similar Entities, code number E03863. It reflects the views only of the authors, and the European 
Commission is not liable for any consequence stemming from the reuse of this document.  
Register of Commission Expert Groups and Other Similar Entities, code number E03863   

2 
 Executive Summary  
Sustainable Urban Logistics Plans (SULPs) are strategic frameworks designed to optimise the 
transportation of goods within urban areas, aiming to reduce environmental impact, improve 
efficiency, and enhance quality of life. These plans play a critical role  in making cities more 
resilient to climate change and rapid urbanisation while ensuring that logistics services remain 
efficient and reliable.  
It is recommended that Develop an EU -wide common approach for data collection and 
voluntary data sharing for SULPs, as local authorities are lacking of quality data about 
urban freight transport flows. Data collection and sharing on freight transport often relies on 
specific agreements between the public and private sectors.  
It is recommended that the existing SULP guidelines are updated and include new elements 
(real estate market, energy provision, circular economy)  that have not been considered earlier 
and take into account the latest innovations, such as digitalisation tools like Digital Twins, 
blockchain, artificial intelligence (AI), and Data Spaces.  
It is recommended to  provide expert support and training to local authorities on urban 
logistics, as the digital revolution has accelerated logistics planning and execution in urban 
settings.  The development or reinforcement of educational and training programmes 
targeting logistics should also be pursued, as a way for local authorities to recruit more easily 
professionals with technical expertise on urban freight.  
It is recommended to Set a policy framework at national level to ensure safety, social 
sustainability, and good working conditions of all workers of the logistics sector, in 
particular those that are most affected (e.g. truck drivers, urban deliveries, etc.).  
It is recommended to set a policy framework to encourage collaborative logistics to share 
vehicles and assets, that encourages business (shippers) and logistics service providers to 
cooperate to facilitate collaborative logistics that can maximise use of all available resources. 
Hubs appear to be the best option for cities to better organise supplies and enhance li veability.  
Cities through SULPs to create a policy framework to encourage business (shippers) and 
logistics service providers to cooperate to facilitate collaborative logistics that can maximise 
use of all resources (e.g. reducing empty runs).  
It is recommended to strengthen the collaboration between local authorities and the 
private sector , building long term mechanism to facilitate public and private dialogues focused 
on urban freight, such as freight quality partnerships.  
It is recommended to Develop awareness campaigns and incentive schemes to encourage 
sustainable e -commerce activities from business and citizens, as their acceptability is 
greatly enhanced by adequate stakeholder engagement.  
 
  
3 
  
Table of Contents  
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  4 
1.1 Urban logistics: the definition  ................................ ................................ ............  4 
1.2 Stakeholders: the definition  ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
1.3 Urban Logistics: current challenges  ................................ ................................ .... 5 
2. SULP: THE STATE -OF-THE-ART ................................ ................................ ...................  6 
2.1 Integration of Urban Logistics with other public policies  ................................ ........  6 
2.2 Collaboration between public with private stakeholders  ................................ .........  7 
3. RECOMMENDED ACTIONS  ................................ ................................ .......................  8 
ANNEX – ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  ................................ ................................ .............  20 
List of acronyms and abbreviations  ................................ ................................ .........  20 
About the group  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 21 
 
  
4 
 1. Introduction  
1.1 Urban logistics : the definition   
Urban logistics is vital to all systems and functionalities of cities . Urban logistics deliver s 
construction materials, food and all goods needed for daily life . Without urban logistics, cities 
will not function.  
Urban logistics can be  defined as “ the movement of things (as distinct from people) to, from, 
within, and through urban areas.1” or “ those movements of goods that are affected by 
particularities associated to urban traffic and morphology2.” However, the definition of urban 
logistics varies with difference in type of goods and services, use of transport modes and 
infrastructure, and spatial and functional structure. In this document, the definition of urban 
logistics covers:  
• Type of goods and services:  
- Business -to-business ( B2B) large volumes of goods (e.g. delivery to supermarket)  
- Construction materials and waste  
- Business -to-Consumer ( B2C) large volumes of goods (e.g. furniture)  
- B2C small packages  
- Collected waste from business and residents  
• Use of transport mode:  
- Road transport: Heavy Duty Vehicles (HDV s), Light Duty Vehicles (L DVs), Cargo 
bicycles and tricycles, delivery or collection on foot  
- Inland waterway transport  
- Urban railway  
- Air mobility  
- Autonomous vehicles and robots  
• Use of infrastructure in additional to transport networks:  
- Charging and refuelling stations  
- Depots, warehouses, and logistics hubs  
- Off road parking facilities and curb si de space  
• Spatial and functional structure:  
- Central business district (CBD)  
- Urban core area  
- Suburban residential areas  
- Exurbia that has functional areas supporting urban freight distributions, e.g. 
highway networks, warehouses, or large freight transport hubs (e.g. airport and 
ports) are not considered by this document.  
1.2 Stakeholders: the definiti on 
Urban logistics is an interdisciplinary  topic , and its complexity engages with many actors from 
the public and private sectors. As the Subgroup aims to deliver actionable recommendations 
for implementing the Urban Mobility Framework  (UMF) , this document primarily addresses 
key stakeholders whose actions can have significant impacts on the implementation of the 
UMF . The main actors addressed by this document are:  
- EU Commission Services (e.g. DG MOVE) and EU institutions who can implement 
transport related projects and policies;  
 
1 Ogden, K. W. 1992. Urban Goods Movement: A Guide to Policy and Planning . Burlington, VT : Ashgate 
Publishing, Ltd.  
2 Muñuzuri, J. , J. Larrañeta , L. Onieva , and P. Cortés . 2005 . “Solutions Applicable by Local Administrations for 
Urban Logistics Improvement.” Cities 22 ( 1 ): 15 – 28. 
5 
 - Regional and local authorities as planners and regulators who are responsible for 
local policies on transport, mobility, environment, energy and economic 
development .  
- Public t ransport authorities or network operators have not been primarily focused ; 
- Local residents , associations of citizens.  
- Private sectors primarily addressed by this document:  
o Freight owners/shippers including e -commerce who need freight moved as 
part of their commercial or manufacturing activities. They are mainly 
concerned with the cost, capacity, and reliability of deliveries.  
o Business (construction companies, retailers) who need to receive products 
and remove waste. They are mainly concerned with consistent and reliable 
deliveries that minimize inventory costs.  
o Distributors/Carriers/logistics service providers who store, move, and 
deliver the goods. They are concerned by factors impacting their 
operations, particularly congestion and parking difficulties.  
Original Equipment Manufacturer s (OEMs ) who manufacture vehicles for 
freight transport . 
 
1.3 Urban Logistics: current challenges  
Urban freight transport is essential for city life. Urban freight transport contributes between 
10% and 20% of vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT) and two of five percent of the employed 
urban workforce3. According  to Eurostat  urban freight in 2017 constitutes for almo st 15% of 
the greenhouse gas (GHG) emiss ions and 30% of air pollutions  in city4.  
Urban freight  volumes  continues  to grow due to urbanisation and most recently, the rise in e-
commerce  practices . Also, since the COVID -19 pandemic,  on-demand and  fast deliver ies 
have increased and reshaped  urban freight . In 2022, the most common online purchases of 
goods were clothes , shoes or accessories (ordered by 42% of internet users)5.  
Increased demand for home delivery of online purchased goods and employment 
opportunities provided by collaborative economy platforms have resulted in sharp increase of 
use of cargo -bikes, raising complex issues about demand for infrastructure (cycling lanes, 
parking) and urban space (logistics hubs in central areas), road safety, workers’ right . 
Much emphasis is given in recent policy making and EU funding programmes (e.g. Horizon 
2020 and Horizon Europe) to parcel and last -mile deliveries . Despite being a visible  
phenomenon , they  only account for about 3% of the total VKT. Conversely, construction 
logistics accounts for a much more significant 37% of VKT6. Construction of new infrastructure 
and buildings is likely to continue to grow due to urbanisation  and needs for building renovation 
for more energy efficiency . Rubble removal, building material being transported, and various 
construction -related services require H eavy Goods Vehicles  (HGVs)  that cannot be replaced 
with small vehicles. Loading process of H GVs often cause s congestion  in urban networks.   
Urban logistics  challenges  can be summarised into four categorie s: emissions  and pollutions 
(air pollution and noise ), infrastructure and land use, safety , and workforce.  These challenges 
are often interrelated. For examples, logistics hubs for fast grocery delivery (so called ‘dark 
store s’) have been banned by some cities in the Netherland s due to excessive noise level in 
 
3 Urban Freight Research Roadmap, https://www.ertrac.org/wp -
content/uploads/2022/07/ERTRAC_Alice_Urban_Freight.pdf  
4 Energy, transport and environment statistics – 2020 edition , https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products -
statistical -books/ -/ks-dk-20-001  
5https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products -eurostat -news/w/ddn -20230228 -
2#:~:text=In%202022%2C%20the%20most%20common,42%25%20of%20internet%20users ).  
6 PhD Thesis of KU Leuven , https://research.kuleuven.be/portal/en/project/3E240107   
6 
 residential areas . Congestion caused by loading process can be mitigated by pr e-booked 
curb-side space7.  
2. SULP: the state -of-the-art  
Increasingly, European cities are widening the scope of these plans to include freight transport 
and logistics – resulting cases in the development of Sustainable Urban Logistics Plans 
(SULPs).  Many cities have develop ed their SULPs to meet the challenges of urban freight’s 
environmental impact which represents around 15 -20 percent  of city flows but generates 30  
percent  of pollutant emissions.  
The EU established a clear strategy for " near zero emission urban logistics by 2030 ” in the 
2011 White Paper, which was followed by several supportive initiatives such as the Urban 
Mobility Package, the Low Emission Strategy of 2016, and the three Mobility packages of 2017 
and 2018. EU has also developed a guideline for SULPs (Topic Guide: Sustainable Urban 
Logistics Planning) through the NOV ELOG project  in 2014 and an updated version has been 
published in 2019 . The SULPITER8 project has developed examples of SULPs for Bologna, 
Brescia, Budapest, Maribor, Poznan, Rijeka and Stuttgart.  
There are several other reports published in recen t years that provide guidelines for cities to  
tackle urban freight,  such as “ POLIS – ALICE Joint Guide for advancing together towards 
zero-emission urban logistics by 20309”, and POLIS, TDA and C40’s How -to Guide on Zero -
Emission Zones for Freight10”.  
More at the national level , in France, the French Ministry for Ecological Transition and 
Territorial Cohesion selected the Innovations Territoriales et Logistique Urbaine Durable  
(InTerLUD) programme to create forums for dialogue between public and economic players, 
with the aim of drawing up sustainable urban logistics charters to promote low -carbon, energy -
efficient goods transport and helped the development of SULP s in 40 French cities. The Dutch 
National Climate Agreement was established in 2018 and CO 2 emissions by freight traffic 
entered t he equation. Over a hundred parties committed to implementing Zero -Emission 
Zones for city logistics by the year 202511. 
2.1 Integration of Urban Logistics with other public policies  
According to the UMF , the upgraded SUMP concept should make it clear that the priority is to 
favour sustainable solutions such as active, collective, public, and shared mobility (including 
for urban -rural linkages), fully integrating resilience aspects, and innovations  based on zero -
emission vehicles and solutions. It ought to be enhanced further, considering the requirement 
for indicators and SUMP requirements for the TEN -T urban nodes12.  
The integration of urban logistics within the global mobility framework of cities is also a key 
challenge. Most cities have Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (SUMPs) that marginally 
consider – or even not mention at all  urban freight . This translates into difficulties as mobility 
of passengers and freight cannot work in silos as they share networks, infrastructures , and 
urban space. The same applies to Low Emission Zones (LEZ), Zero Emissions Zones (ZEZ) 
 
7 The Coding the Curbs project, partly funded by EIT Urban Mobility, tested a platform for logistics companies to 
book loading zones in Groningen and Bucharest, aiming to improve delivery times and reduce unnecessary 
congestion.  
8 https://programme2014 -20.interreg -central.eu/Content.Node/SULPiTER/D.T3.2.6 -SULP -POLICY -DOCUMENT -
Bologna -FUA.pdf  
9 https://www.etp -logistics.eu/polis -and-alice-launch -their-joint-guide -for-advancing -together -towards -zero-
emission -urban -logistics -by-2030/   
10 https://www.polisnetwork.eu/wp -content/uploads/2020/12/ZEZ -F_How -to-Guide_low.pdf   
11 https://www.polisnetwork.eu/article/rotterdam -roadmap/   
12 TEN-T node requirements: By 31 December 2040, the development of at least one multimodal freight terminal, 
which may serve several urban nodes.  
7 
 or any restricted -access area – as they need to be thought out around urban freight challenges 
as well and day -to-day logistic drivers' reality.   
In 2023, the Commission Recommendation on National Support Programmes for Sustainable 
Urban Mobility Planning stressed the need to help local authorities integrate and improve 
coordination between SUMPs and spatial planning, and improve alignment and syner gies with 
SULPs, and other relevant plans.  
2.2 Collaboration between public with private stakeholders  
To build public policies and SULP s fitting day -to-day professionals’ reality, they need to be 
included in the building process of such document. The objective is to have an exhaustive and 
representative roundtable of private actors: both bigger firms and SMEs, as well as all relevant 
secto rs (retailers, wholesalers, craftsmen, operators, LSPs etc.) - which is not an easy task 
for city planners. A strong component of this collaboration lies in building efficient, trustworthy, 
and lasting relationships with local stakeholders around SULP. The y need to be solicited 
carefully, with matters relevant to them, to be updated of progress regularly. Cities need to 
work on solutions with them, to fit their daily operation challenges and include them in the 
process.   
Collaboration  between public and private parties is key to success. A strong political support 
is an important asset in both the collaboration and relationship with private stakeholders and 
the implementation phase of the SULPs, as it attests of the engagement of the c ity on the 
topic and embodies its ambition to move toward s concrete action.  
 
 
  Our observation :  
 
Guidance on SULPs should be more flexible  by providing a range of potential actions and 
new adaptive planning methods to city planners:  
 
• SULP s can be a tool to accelerate the deployment, uptake and upscaling of 
innovative and sustainable transport solutions already available .  
• SULP s currently focus on small volumes of goods and lack focus on logistics for 
construction sites and other large volume of goods. There is lack of knowledge and 
awareness of waste management, specific heavy -duty vehicles, and vehicle access 
regulation related  to urban construction sites which have significant impacts on 
urban logistics .   
• Enforcement of regulations is fundamental for proficient urban logistics 
management. Regulatory enforcement is crucial in maintaining the seamless  
operation of various logistical aspects within the city and is crucial in safeguarding 
optimized space allocation.  
 
 
8 
 3. Recommended Actions  
R1: Develop an EU -wide common approach for data collection and voluntary data 
sharing for SULP s 
The current  “Topic Guide: Sustainable Urban Logistics Planning ”13 published in 2019  
recommends ‘ A Data collection framework for UFT’ including ‘basic data  to be collected ’ and 
‘method for data analysis ’. However, i t does not define what the essential datasets for SULP s 
should consist of .  
Collecting d ata from the logistics sector is  a very  complex task, for several reasons . Although 
urban logistics has increased its importance in policy making, there is still lack of research 
towards a beter knowledge and modelling of urban freight transport flow s, resulting in 
insufficient data availability .  
Data collection and sharing on freight transport often relies on specific agreements between 
the public and  private sectors , which are challenging  and often done on a case -by-case 
situations  (due to competition, sensitivity, GDPR  issues , etc.). An EU-wide common approach 
would make data sharing from multiple national businesses (including logistics service 
providers) easy to support local government.    
Action R1.1: Identify needs for the essential dataset for SULP s 
In the current guide lines and many of SULPs available in various European cities, there is lack 
of coherence on needs for the essential dataset. Urban  freight is not only about traffic flow s 
and vehicles, but also type of goods transported, loading process es, and storage. The 
identif ication of  needs for the essential dataset is the first action to enable an EU -wide common 
approach for data collection for SULP s. Some examples  from EU cities below :   
In Bologna, in order to evaluate the current situation about freight transport flows for SULP, 
interviews to traders and transport operators have been conducted. LDVs Origin Destination  
(OD) matrix has been developed based on Floating Vehicle Data. Data on construction 
logistics and waste collection has not been included. Therefore, it is not possible to understand 
percentage of such freight traffic flow account for the total freight transport flow.  
Faced with a lack of reliable, exhaustive, and available data, the State and the Regional 
Council of Ile -de-France, with the technical support of the Paris Region Institute (PRI), have 
created an observatory to enable the collection of all available freight and logistics resources 
in order to produce, share and enhance knowledge between the actors in the sector and to 
inform political decision -making and assess its impact.  
In Barcelona, the municipal application AreaDUM allows the city to retrieve real -time 
information, that can also be used by scholars for the analysis of urban freight mobility14. The 
available data, aggregated and anonymised, provide information about delivery zone, type of 
vehicle, type of activity, day, and time.  
Action R1. 2: Initiate pilots in different  types of cities to create best practices and 
knowledge in data collection and sharing for SULP s 
Cities can act as living laboratories where innovations are experimented and introduced 
progressively . Living Labs (LLs) are open innovation ecosystems in real -life environments that 
can be useful for SULP s implementation , as t hey focus on  co-creation, testing  and scaling -
up innovations . They often are permanent working group s where stakeholders discuss policy 
 
13 https://urban -mobility -observatory.transport.ec.europa.eu/index_en   
14 https://www.lvmt.fr/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/Theme -3.-Nouvelles -donnees -cas-detude -de-Barcelone.pdf  
9 
 proposals, share their own opinions and needs while gaining insight into those of others, and 
actively participate in the implementation of the solutions15.  
Current SULP guidelines make a reference  to the needs for standards, governance models, 
and trusted body to enable data sharing . However, s uch principles remain at a theoretical level 
without concrete steps  to advance data availability for developing, implementing and 
monitoring a SULP. There is a l ack of real -life demonstrations to implement an holistic 
approach of data collection to use all existing methodologies and knowledge to make data 
available and projects, research and discussions on data sharing f or SULPs. Projects that 
demonstrate good practices in a diverse types of cities to collect, analyse data are essential 
for SULP  implementation . 
Using floating vehicle data (FVD) to analyse movement is one of many way to collect data to 
understand freight movement. The city of Stockholm  is working with Scania to share data 
supporting e -mobility planning and freight optimization. Purchasing FVD from private owners 
or seeking agreement with data owners can be time -consuming and cost ly.  
Other data collection methods, e.g. use Automatic Number Plate Recognition  (ANPR ) 
cameras  to identify movement . A case study of the analysis of such a data source, with 
augmented ANPR camera data for the police district of Mechelen  - Willebroek (Belgium ) 
shows that 122 ANPR cameras can cover a district of 92,6 square kilometres  to enable 
analysis movements of LDVs and HGVs16.  
Action R1.3: Form a guideline for data collection  for SULP s, including types of data 
needed, methodology to collect and use data for policy development and impact 
monitoring  
Data collection and sharing with freight stakeholders is an increasingly important topic. 
Retailers and delivery companies should  provide data about logistic flows to municipalities, 
while municipalities need to feed companies involved in urban logistics with updated  
information on local regulations on traffic, parking, delivery areas, delivery time windows, or 
the forecasting of road works and street or lane closures.  
Guideline s for data collection for SULP s are needed to address the lack of a holistic approach 
to collect data . A new strategy in this sense should be aligned with the European data strategy 
and the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy, and coherent with other initiatives towards 
a common European mobility data space . The guideline s shall make reference to  data 
collection approaches , data purchasing agreements  from various stakeholders , how to use 
the data, and analysis models or tools.   
In the Netherlands, freight operators’ data sharing has been accelerated by a national 
provision . More than  40 Dutch cities are required to establish zero -emission zones by 2025, 
which would include freight. As part of this process, a shared data model with possible 
advantages like privileged access for enterprises providing data is being planned.  
Action R1. 4: Form a guideline for local authorities to communicate benefits of data 
sharing to various types of private sectors  
Establish long -term p artnerships with logistics operators, e -retailers, and delivery apps could 
be a good way forward for local authorities to retrieve regular ly data and  information.  Currently, 
policy makers and urban planners  interested in operators’ data go operator per operator (non -
disclosure agreements and memorandums of understanding need to be carefully crafted), 
 
15 Nesterova, N., and Quak, H. (2016). A city logistics living lab: A methodological approach. Transportation 
Research Procedia, 16.  
16 Analyzing passenger and freight vehicle movements from automatic -Number plate recognition camera data | 
European Transport Research Review | Full Text (springeropen.com)  
 
10 
 which makes the process very slow. Moreover, companies are reluctant to provide their data, 
key to their business models.  
Currently, e ach EU country has its own legal requirements in this context, which ha s an impact 
on the possibility of data collection in commercial transactions. Therefore, t argeted guidelines  
should  be harmonised at EU level . They should  provide clear instructions to local authorities 
on how to better communicate with various stakeholders of the private sector – e.g. different 
communication strategies for local SM Es and international businesses to address different 
needs and expectations. Moreover, local au thorities would  save time and energy to 
understand needs of various stakeholders and adopt the guideline for local specifications to 
foster efficient cooperation with local stakeholders.   
 
R2: Update existing SULP guidance and include new element s 
Currently, SULPs guidelines do not address latest innovation  and need to be updated with 
important elements. Although drafting regulations and testing vehicles occur simultaneously, 
large -scale implementation of vehicle automation still requires developments of the regulatory 
framework.   
Automation (i.e., autonomous surface and aerial delivery vehicles)  might  contribute towards 
the achieve ment of  environmental  benefits through replacing or integrating with current 
delivery systems, including providing the “last mile,” in urban areas.  
Another example, energy provision has not been considered and energy providers are not one 
of among stakeholders covered by current SULP  guidelines . Renewed and updated guidelines 
should  leverage digitali sation tools like Digital Twin s, blockchain, artificial intelligence ( AI), and 
Data Spaces as able to generate strategic data for freight -related network planning, 
investment, and policy formulation more effectively and economically than traditional methods.   
An increase attention to the real estate market, w ith a view to better land -use management  
(densification and verticalisation of logistics, e .g. urban logistics hotels) or the pooling of 
already urbanised and multimodal spaces.  Regulations and planning play an  essential role for 
supporting these developments  and innovations . SULP s should also be an enabler for cities 
to support , implement, test and upscale  innovation and technologies that can grea tly 
contribute to decarbonise urban freight.   
Action R2.1: Integrate urban logistics in local strategies and city policies beyond 
mobility and transport sector  
The initial focus of the concept of Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (SUMPs) focused on 
passenger transport and personal mobility.  Integrat ing SULP s with SUMP s has been 
recommended by the current guide  and by the subgroup on SUMP of the  Expert Group on 
Urban Mobility ( EGUM ).  
However, in order to  support updates of innovative solution s and use of zero emission vehicles 
for freight transport,  SULP s should consider renewable energy planning, e.g. a sufficiently 
dense suitable network of charging/ refuelling infrastructures for all sizes logistics vehicles . 
Urban space planning and land use, e.g. integration of cargo bikes needs, management of 
construction sites logistics, identifying (public owned) sites to be potentially transformed into 
logistics hubs, charging/refuelling facilities, or energy gene ration, flexible use of street space.  
 
Action R2.2: Support consumer engagement  including raising awareness on delivery 
choices and pick -up choices  with active mobility  
11 
 New guideline s shall include elements on how to increase consumer awareness and d evelop 
sustainable delivery choices and proper management of returns . SULP s can work with local 
residents and businesses to set up pick -up choices to enable residents to walk or cycling for 
picking up their parcels.   
The d igitalisation of reverse flows should  become more circular. Trials and experimentation in 
Sweden  to engage retailers in a digital transformation process, with new capabilities, cost 
reduction,  efficiency in handling returns, etc.  
Action R2.3: Include m easures that can support circular economy  
The need to pursue more  sustainab le practices  has led to the application of circular economy 
approaches based on ‘closed loop’ systems that are intended to minimise waste with an 
emphasis on efficient resource use .  
New SULP guideline s shall consider measures that can support circular economy17, e.g. waste 
management, “ refuse, reduce, rethink, reuse, repair, repurpose, recycle ” approach, logistics 
of re-usable packaging, etc.   
The current SULPs guidelines do not address return flows . Cities should address  solid return 
mechanism in combination with the private sector, retailers but also waste collection entities 
(private or public) . SULP s can help cities support return flows for disposed goods (electronic 
devices, clothes,  etc.) by embedding returns in the forward flows (home delivery and pick -up), 
organise pick -up days and /or embed return, repair and waste into urban service centers.  
Action R2.4 Considering setting up urban service centres  
Urban service centers  / mobility hubs  are an extension of urban logistics centers where various 
shared mobility services are bundled in one place , including logistics services (return, repair, 
refurbishment, waste management , etc). Cities should  encourage and  promote the set up of 
this kind of  services . 
The combination of passenger and freight mobility services require the cooperation of different 
types of stakeholders which are not used to cooperate. For the local authorities, this implies 
some challenges in setting up new forms of cooperation and partnerships between the more 
traditional public transport operators, the newer mobility services providers, and logistics 
operators.  Recent examples  that go in this direction are the mobility hotels opened in 2024  In 
Oslo and Gothenburg (MOVE21 project) .  
SULP guidelin es may provide indications on potent ial options that c ities can use ( locations , 
types of buildings) in which urban service centers can be develop ed and this for both local 
(smaller) and more general (regional, national) initiatives.  The absence of a common starting 
point for mobility hub projects and the need to build up efforts from the ground level were 
noted.  
Action R2. 5: Support on monitoring and evaluation of SULPs’ implementation paths 
and impacts  
New guideline s should  identify relevant Key Perforance Indicators ( KPIs ) that can be used to 
evaluate the impacts of SULPs on medium to long term. KPIs should also support policy 
makers to identify actions needed for future planning  and essential datasets needed to for the 
KPIs . They should be aligned also at the EU and national level to ensure as much as possible 
consistency and comparison between different geographical areas.  
 
17 The circular economy is a model of production and consumption, which involves sharing, leasing, reusing, 
repairing, refurbishing and recycling existing materials and products as long as possible. In this way, the life cycle 
of products is extended. (Source : European Parliament).  
12 
  
R3: Provide expert support and training to local authorities  on urban logistics  
The EC has been providing support to local authorities through research and innovation 
projects , the ELTIS and CIVITAS initiative , and other funding programmes . ELTIS and 
CIVITAS  enabled the collection of all available freight and logistics resources in order to 
produce, share and enhance knowledge between the actors in the sector and to inform political 
decision -making and assess its impact . Some of the EU-funded projects provide  the technical 
training and capacity buildings, policy recommendations whilst other  projects helped cities 
directly in implementing SULPs  (e.g. the SULPITER  project funded by Interreg  Program me, 
and many others ).  
 
Action R3.1: To develop training and technical supports on how to develop a 
comprehensive understanding of the urban freight flows and eco -systems;  
 
The digital revolution has accelerated logistics planning and execution in urban settings. New 
urban logistics services have emerged thanks to advancements in technology. Local 
authorities  should  fully embrace opportunities offered by digitali sation  and promote 
partnerships and dialogue with the private logistics operators to set up common mechanisms 
and procedures that allow a better knowledge of incoming and outcoming freight flows. Local 
authorities should also be able to develop adequate skills in data gathering and analysis, to 
fully assess and manage the quality of data and information gathered (ideally in aggregated 
and anonymised forms).  
 
Action R3.2: To provide training on how to integrate policies of urban logistics with 
other policies  
 
Urban freight , often overlooked in mobility strategies, can benefit from initiatives that aim to 
integrate various aspects of urban planning and mobility.  A comprehensive and integrated 
approach to urban mobility planning is essential to effectively harmoni se various aspects of  
urban mobility, such as city logistics. Multi -level collaboration plays a crucial role, as  the need 
for different national  / regional  / local government levels need to work together effectively to 
align policies from the EU to the local level, and corresponding climate goals.  
 
At the EU level, s pecific calls for capacity building initiatives could be linked to the SUMP 
National Sump Support Programmes, or capacity building initiatives within the  ELTIS and 
CIVITAS  Programmes . At domestic level, n ational ministries also have various programmes 
to support cities in developing SULPs, such as the  InTerLUD ongoing programme  in France . 
 
Action R3.3: To provide ex pert support in monitoring impact of policy measures on 
urban logistics and fully integrate policies of urban logistics and propose actions to 
mitigate negative impacts.  
 
The development or reinforcement of educational and training program mes – especially at 
university level - for the numerous jobs that urban logistics represents may prove beneficial 
for both local and national stakeholders. Increasing the attractiveness of carriers  in the industry 
should be one of  the main  goals of the private sector , and as a way to recruit more easily 
professionals with technical expertise  on urban freight.  Local authorities would also greatly 
benefit from technical experts  with skills in urban logistics and supply chain management  that 
are employed full -time and with long -term contracts in the mobility departments.     
13 
  
This would facilitate a continuous  monitoring of the actions and measures taken and assess 
concrete impacts and trends  through time , and a regular interaction and exchange with 
logistics players . Remedial actions could be more easily taken whether the expected 
outcomes would not be achieved. A guidance on selected KPIs to be track ed and monitor ed 
could be  useful to local authorities in the long term to facilitate comparisons at EU level . 
 
R4: Set a policy framework at national level to ensure safety, social sustainablity, and 
good working conditions of all workers of the logistics sector  
Most likely higher delivery frequencies of smaller orders, typical for online shoppers, generate 
negative impacts on traffic flows, road safety, loading factors and air quality.  Moreover, t here 
are new options of logistics services, e.g. off-peak deliveries, low and zero emission freight 
vehicles  of new generation,  the different types of cargo bikes.  
As an example, d rivers of cargo -bikes may not receive appropriate training on safety, as they 
are larger and heavier than other cycles and riders require additional skills , and they may be 
hired through collaborative economy platforms without insurance etc.   
Setting a national policy framework to ensure safety and social sustainability addressed to 
better represent worker  categorie s in the logistics sector is necessary. It should be set at 
national level  policy as restrictive interventions  in this sense from a single local authority  may 
result in withdrawing services from a given city or region.  
 
R5: Set a policy framework to encourage collaborative logistics to share vehicles and 
assets  
Cities through SULP s to create a policy framework to encourage business (shippers) and 
logistics service providers to cooperate to facilitate collaborative logistics that can maximise 
use of all resources (e.g. reducing empty runs). Cities can be a facilitator to connect 
businesses and provide incentives schemes.   
Hubs appear to be the best option for cities  to better organi se supplies and enhance liveability. 
Less vehicles would be required to move the same volume in and out of cities by consolidating 
various logistic  flows into hubs outside of them.  However, the recent experience s coming from 
many EU-funded projects showed that  urban consolidation centres  (UCCs)  were in most 
cases not continuing their operations after the end of public funding , due to lack of economic 
viability. Therefore, alternative ways  and busi ness models  should  be tested and explored.  
Successful urban collaborative logistics has been operated in Antwerp  via the  CULT 
(Collaborative Urban Logistics & Transport)  initiative.  and will soon be operated in Brussels. 
In Antwerp, 14 distributors have been collaborating using the same delivery option s through 
the TRI -VIZOR plat form. The implementation has been in operation since 202218. It can 
reduce vehicle mil eage (d riving ) by 25% and emissions by 90% through  combined city 
deliveries .  
In cities in Sweden, iBoxen  has deploy ed a nationwide infrastructure of delivery boxes to pick 
up, return and ship packages. The new infrastructure create s sustainable  conditions for 
economic growth.  The open, independent and national wide infrastructure for the delivery, 
return and shipping of parcels across Sweden has been supported by 2 large publicly traded 
property investment companies - Fastighets AB Balder and SBB Norden AB.  It has been seen 
 
18 cultcitylogistics.be  
14 
 as an important step in supporting the growth of e -commerce while protecting the 
environment19.  
 
Action R 5.1: Encourage and facilitate vehicles and logistics assets (e.g. microhubs, 
parcel lockers) sharing through standardi sed processes, load units, digital platforms 
and data spaces.  
 
The adoption of 'white label' hubs might assist logistics service providers to become more 
sustainable and  to provide  a significant contribution to zero -emission . The main  challenge is 
to make the micro  hub concept profitable , as margins in the sector are small. Therefore , efforts 
from the local sector should strive to (i) develop  a sustainable financing model, (ii) a well 
thought -out design of the micro hub , which is crucial for efficient use and therefore success, 
(iii) build micro hubs on the right locations in the city . In this way, white labels is an option but 
there are other ways (e.g. allowing companies to distribute in districts when they have a 
minimum volume to distribute in that district or others, e.g. Physical Internet) . 
 
Action R 5.2: Ensure pick -up points , micro -hubs  and parcel lockers  can be accessed 
by residents within 15 minutes walking in most urban areas and can be used by 
various e -commerce actors.  
 
Micro hubs are placed close to urban  consolidation centr es, and vehicles are deployed to them 
on regular routes throughout the day to ensure time -definite delivery windows.  Different kinds  
of micro -hubs have been tested in different cities,  also within several EU -funded research 
projects. However, key challenges  of those  models rely on  stakeholder collaboration, 
competition issues, infrastructure and resource availability.  
 
Studies in the Netherlands, Italy and Poland reveal that parcel lockers generate a considerable 
reduction in vehicle -miles trave lled and carbon emissions20. Parcel lockers have been in use 
in Finland since 2011. Their use is very popular and over the years the locker network has 
expanded to cover the whole country. Most of the parcel lockers are located indoors, usually 
in stores , kiosks or in shopping centres. Parcel lockers from several operators are often 
located at the same point.  
 
Action R 5.3: Go beyond the urban scale, cities as complex nodes  
 
Many urban regions are net importers of products given the quantity of retail, leisure, 
commercial firms  and public facilities.  Urban goods transit often starts and ends at a 
commercial freight facility. Facilities  include depots, warehouses, logistics hubs  / fulfillment 
centr es, and intermodal terminals. They  are major drivers of goods vehicle activity.  
 
The recently adopted revision of the TEN -T Directive will require urban nodes to (i) d evelop 
multimodal passenger hubs and appropriate connections with multimodal freight terminals by 
2030  and (ii) h ave at least one multimodal passenger hub and one multimodal freight terminal 
by 2040.  New generation SULPs should take into acc ount not only the local dimension of 
urban freight but reflect also planning on a regional scale  and e nsure a lignment with regional, 
national and TEN -T scale  policies .  
 
19 https://news.cision.com/iboxen -infrastruktur/r/a -nationwide -infrastructure -of-delivery -boxes -to-be-launched -in-
sweden,c3287628   
20 Iwan, S. Kijewska, K. and Lemke, J. (2016) Analysis of Parcel Lockers’ Efficiency as the Last Mile Delivery 
Solution – The Results of the Research in Poland. Transportation Research Procedia, 12, 644 –655. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2016.02.018 .  
15 
 R6: Strengthen the collaboration between local authorities and private sector, 
establish or maintain effective partners to ensure various actors’ contributions to 
policy making  
Cities may consider to build  a long term mechanism to facilitate public and private dialogues 
focused on  urban freight. Since many freight operators and business wish to be able to deliver 
efficiently in cities, to develop an understanding of freight transport issues and needs to form 
constructive solutions is essential to ensure cities’  prosperity .  
Freight partnerships are long term partnerships between freight stakeholders concerned with 
urban freight, that on a forma l or informal basis meet regularly to seek solutions to problems 
and discuss  issues that occur in the urban area . It is a partnership between the  local 
government, the  freight industry, local businesses, the local community, environmental groups 
and others with an interest in freight.  Some examples are the Flemish 'Green Deal Sustainable 
Urban Logistics', Brussels’s Urban Logistics Green  Deal, Rotterdam’s Logistiek010, Central 
London Freight Quality Partnership .  
While building such partnerships or initiate dialogues, it is important to ensure the widest 
participation  possible  also of the HoReCa21 sector and local small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs ), who may lack resources and experienc e in joining such public -private dialogues.  
 
R7: Develop awareness campai gns and incentive schemes to enco urage sustain able 
e-commerce activities from busin ess and citizens  
According to EU’s 2023 survey22, 93% of EU citizens believe that climate change is a serious 
problem . However , many of them are much less aware of environmental  impacts of their e -
commerce shipping options nor have opportunities to take actions to reduce associated 
emissions  associated with their purchases .  
Their acceptability is greatly enhanced by adequate stakeholder engagement, understood as 
the participation of various interested parties (producers and shippers, freight transport and 
logistics operators, recipients, residents, local public authorities, and ot hers) in the decision -
making process . 
 
Action R 7.1: Awareness campaigns to citizens on impacts of e -commerce on 
environment  
 
When customers are given additional knowledge  about how their actions can have an impact  
on sustainability, it has a favourable influence on their purchasing decisions. This concept is 
at the core of the CountEmissions EU regulation proposal, which will provide a multimodal, 
door-to-door harmonised framework to calculate and disclose Well -To-Wheel GHG emissions 
of transport services.23 Consumers and operators will be able to shift their choices towards 
the most environmentally friendly logistics solutions. Retailers may positively contribute to the 
process by giving more  information about the impact upon the environment of single 
purchases, and proposed alternative  options for green er deliver ies. Customers are asking for 
more and more details on the delivery of their purchases. Customers who do not currently 
have a simple method to grasp the implications of their actions must be given consistent 
information.  
 
 
21 Hotel, restaurant and café.  
22 https://climate.ec.europa.eu/citizens/citizen -support -climate -action_en   
23 COM/2023/441 final  
16 
 Action R 7.2: Propose more sustainable delivery options to consumers  
 
Retailers may provide and encourage more sustainable delivery practices.  Alternative  delivery 
options  to customers  should not be  causing additional  flow fragmentation, as this might have 
negative  impacts  (e.g., having the standard vehicle and the low - or zero -emissions vehicle 
deliver).  Free returns typically result in extra transportation, which must be handled carefully.  
Despite t he public sector has limited powers in this regard , it could encourage  
 
Action R 7.3: Setting up incentive measure s to awar d those who choose sustainable 
deliver ies 
 
There is a l imited role so far from governments  and cities to nudge consumers decisions on  
sustainable  deliveries.  One-off attempts  have been made to charge large companies for the 
use of public space of large e-commerce businesses . However, such an approach towards 
taxation  has found mixed opinions from the public and private sectors about its  effectiveness 
in the medium -long term24. Incentive schemes encourag ing businesses to provide various 
options and information to consumers to enable them to choose the most sustainable options  
are a n alternative.  
 
 
24 https://www.etp -logistics.eu/polis -and-alice -webinar -series -2023/   
17 
 1. Summary of recommendations  (toolkits ) 
Recommendations  Actions  By whom  
EC National 
ministry of 
member state  Local authority  Private sector  
 
2. R1: Develop an EU -wide 
common approach for data 
collection and voluntary 
data sharing for SULP  Action R1.1: Identify needs for the essential dataset for 
SULP  ✔  ✔ ✔  
Action R1.2: Initiate pilots in diverse types of cities to 
create best practices and knowledge in data  collection 
and sharing for SULP    ✔ ✔ 
Action R1.3: Form a guideline for data collection for 
SULP including types of data needed, methodology to 
collect and use data for policy development and impact 
monitoring  ✔ ✔ ✔  
Action R1.4: Form a guideline for local authorities to 
communicate benefits of data sharing to various types 
of private sectors  ✔  ✔  
3. R2: Update existing SULP 
guidance and include new 
elements  Action R2.1: Integrate urban logistics in local strategies 
and city policies beyond mobility and transport sector   ✔ ✔  
Action R2.2: Support consumer engagement including 
raising awareness on delivery choices and pick -up 
choices with active mobility   ✔ ✔ ✔ 
18 
 Action R2.3: Measures that can support circular 
economy    ✔ ✔ 
Action R2.4 Considering setting up urban service 
centres  
   ✔ ✔ 
Action R2.5: Support on monitoring and evaluation of 
SULPs’ implementation paths and impacts  ✔ ✔   
R3: Provide expert support 
and training to local 
authorities on urban logistics  Action R3.1: To develop training and technical supports 
on how to develop a comprehensive understanding of 
the urban freight flows and eco -systems   ✔ ✔ ✔ 
Action R3.2: To provide training on how to integrate 
policies of urban logistics with other policies      
Action R3.3: To provide excerpt support in monitoring 
impact of policy measures on urban logistics and fully 
integrate policies of urban logistics and propose actions 
to mitigate negative impacts.      
R4: Set a policy framework 
at national level to ensure 
safety, social sustainablity, 
and good working conditions 
of all  workers of the logistics 
sector   ✔ ✔   
R5: Set a policy framework 
to encourage collaborative Action 5.1 Encourage white label logistics vehicles 
through standardised load units and digital platforms.    ✔ ✔ 
19 
 logistics to share vehicles 
and assets  Action 5.2: Ensure pick -up points and micro -hubs be 
accessed by residents within 15 minutes walking in 
most urban areas and can be used by various e -
commerce actors.    ✔ ✔ 
 Action 5.3: Go beyond the urban scale, cities as 
complex nodes    ✔ ✔ 
R6: Strengthen the 
collaboration between local 
authorities and private 
sector, establish or maintain 
effective partners to ensure 
various actors’ contributions 
to policy making     ✔ ✔ 
R7: Develop awareness 
campaigns and incentive 
schemes to encoruage 
sustainble e -commerce 
activities from busienss and 
citizens  Action 7.1 Awareness campaigns to citizens on impacts 
of e-commerce on environment     ✔ 
Action 7.2 Propose more sustainable delivery options 
to consumers     ✔ 
Action 7.3 Setting up incentive measure to award those 
who choose sustainable delivery     ✔ 
20 
 Annex – additional information  
 
List of acronyms and abbreviations  
Acronym  Full name  
ANPR  Automatic Number Plate Recognition  
B2B Business to Business  
B2C Business to Consumer  
CEF Connecting Europe Facility  
CBD  Central Business District  
EC European Commission  
EGUM  Expert Group on Urban Mobility  
GHG  Green House Gases  
HDV  Heavy -Duty Vehicle  
HoReCa  Hotellerie  – Restaurant  - Café 
LDV Light -Duty Vehicle  
LEV Low-Emission Vehicle  
LEZ Low-Emission Zone  
LL Living Lab  
KPI Key Performance Indicators  
OEM  Original Equipment Manufacturer  
R&I Research and Innovation  
SULP  Sustainable Urban Logistics Plans  
SUMP  Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans  
UCC  Urban Consolidation Center  
UMF  Urban Mobility Framework  
ZEZ Zero-Emission Zones  
 
21 
  
About the group  
The Subgroup 4 of Expert Group on Urban Mobility (EGUM) is dedicated to urban logistics. It 
is composed by twelve  national ministries of EU member states, seven  regional governments 
and city authorities, and ten associations/organizations. This Subgroup  is coordinated by 
ALICE, POLIS and ACEA.  
This Subgroup aims to developing a set of recommendations for taking actions to advance  the 
implementation of the Urban Mobility Framework. This document has been jointly developed 
by the members of the Subgroup 4. The group believe s that the recommended actions would 
ensure a better and improved quality of life in European cities, contribute to climate actions, 
sustain economic growth and enhance competitiveness of European business.  
Inputs were collected from the members of the Subgroup 4 and EGUM plenary through online 
meetings, in -person meetings and workshops, online questionnaires, online discussion tools 
(e.g. using Miro board). Members of the Subgroup 4 have exchanged informatio n on policy 
development, technology developments, market insights, common challenges, and current 
practices. Results, good practices, and lessons learned from past and ongoing EU funded 
research and innovation (R&I) projects and relevant Living Labs (LLs) have been taken into 
consideration.  
  
List of organisations participating to the subgroup  
 
Subgroup leaders  
 
Alliance for Logistics Innovation through Collaboration in Europe, ALICE AISBL  
European Automobile Manufacturers Association , ACEA  
POLIS  
 
Cities and Regions  
Barcelona Metropolitan Area  
Bremen  
Ile-de-France Region  
Karditsa  
Stockholm  
The Hague  
Toulouse Métropol e 
 
Member States  
Austria  
Belgium  
Czechia  
Finland  
France  
Italy  
Latvia  
Lithuania  
The Netherlands  
Poland  
Portugal  
Spain  
 
22 
 Organisations  
AVERE - The European Association For Electromobility  
Community of European Railway and Infrastructure Companies - CER aisbl  
Council of European Municipalities and Regions - CEMR  
Cycling industries Europe aisbl (CIE)  
European Cyclists Federation (ECF)  
European Transport Workers Federation - ETF-Europe  
Eurocities  
International Road Transport Union - IRU 
LEVA -EU 
MaaS Alliance  
 
Observers  
JRC – Joint Research Centre of the European Commission  
 